Notes
=====

2.3.2 The ternary phase diagram (TPD)
Such a phase diagram is of course possible for CZTS as well, but since it consists of four
kinds of atoms this would need a three dimensional diagram. However, one can assume
that always the right amount of sulphur is in the film as the sulphur is introduced by the
reactions with the metals and therefore depends on how much of those are present. This
assumption will be supported by our measurements where all of our samples contained
≈50% sulphur.
This reduces the degrees of freedom of the system to three and the phase diagram can
be simplified to a ternary phase diagram (TPD). In this study the TPD developed by
Scragg [26] on the basis of comprehensive measurements done by Olekseyuk et al. [27] is
used. It should be noted that this phase diagram is valid in equilibrium at 400°C. Both is
strictly speaking not the case for the experiments performed in this work. Anyhow, as
the sulphurization process used in this work comprised very slow ramping (<0,15°C/s)
and a long dwell time (2h at 520°C) we assume to have a quasi-equilibrium. Furthermore,
other experiments at comparable conditions (e.g. [28]) obtained secondary phases that
are predicted by this phase diagram. Therefore we will use it on a number of occasions,
mostly just to depict the compositions of the samples (i.e. not taking into account any
precondition except of having the right amount of sulphur), but partly also to support or
deduce assumptions concerning composition and secondary phases.
The ternary phase diagram is shown in Fig. 2.16. As can be seen from the scale this is
only a part of the whole diagram. In order to provide a better overview and as no samples
with a metallic ratio outside this section were produced, it will always be shown a zoomed
in version.
There are ten fields drawn in the phase diagram. Each field means the presence of CZTS
plus the one or two secondary phases that are noted. The eleventh region quite in the
middle (marked with an asterisk) means that only CZTS is supposed to be existing. All
secondary phases contain sulphur. As a sufficient amount of sulphur is provided during
the sulphurization process it is assumed that no metallic phases form but only sulfides.
However, not all secondary phases that have been found in the diverse studies have been
found by Olekseyuk, probably due to different conditions. One important secondary phase
that will play a role in this work as well is SnS2. It was for example found by Schurr et
al. [29] and could be found for films with Sn excess.
Talking about regions in the phase diagram it is very helpful to divide it into regions
that are labeled in an unambiguous way and that already indicates which secondary phases
can be expected. This shall be done according to the notation of Scragg (Fig. 2.17). In
the Zn-rich region, for example, ZnS is the expected (main) secondary phase formed by
the excess Zn. The Zn-poor region covers several fields with various possible secondary
phases. It should be noted that this notation is very clear, but different to the notations
used in most publications, where for example only Cu-poor and Cu-rich are distinguished
(e.g. [29]), not taking into account the ratio between the remaining metals.1